---
# License: CC-BY-SA-4.0.
title: "Talking C"
excerpt: "Introduction about the series where we talk about the C programming language..."
image: /assets/img/24/8.jpg
#imageyt: sO_Sdf09DiY
toc: true
axseq: 8
published: true
tags:
  - en
---

As an electronics engineer, my work spans a variety of areas, including but not
limited to embedded systems. C is one of the programming languages that I often
use across these diverse projects. I wanted to share my insights and experiences
with the C programming language through a series of blog posts. To organize
these discussions, I've decided to title the series 'Talking C'.

In this series, I plan to start with the basics and then delve into some more
advanced aspects of the C language. I want to clarify that **I am not a C expert**,
nor do I work with C programming full-time. However, this year marks my 12th
year in my professional engineering career, and I first encountered C
approximately 15-20 years ago as a hobbyist before attending university. It's
important to note that years of experience with a programming language don't
automatically make one proficient. Therefore, I am continuously striving to
enhance my C programming skills. I believe that writing about a topic not only
helps me understand it better but also improves my abilities in that area.

My personality is one of obsession, which significantly influences my
professional life. I am committed to providing the most accurate information
about C programming as possible. However, this doesn't guarantee that everything
will be 100% correct. If you find any mistakes, please feel free to point them
out by commenting on the blog or reaching out to me directly.

Although my plan is to start from the very basics, please note that this series
is not designed as a beginner's tutorial or a comprehensive learning course. I
am neither a certified course instructor nor a teacher. The intention is not for
readers to learn C programming solely through my posts. That being said, if you
are just starting out with C, you'll likely find the content valuable. However,
consider this a friendly warning that my series is not a structured learning
path!

The posts in this series will follow a logical sequence as much as possible. If
you're ready, let's dive in!

## Posts

I recommend you starting from the first post:

<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
{% assign talkingc_posts = site.posts | where_exp:"post", "post.tags contains 'talkingc'" | sort: 'date' %}
<ul>
{% for post in talkingc_posts %}
  <li>
    <a href="{{ post.url | relative_url }}">{{ post.title }}</a>
  </li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
